Estuary Rearing Area Covariate: Estuary_HST

Area of tidal blind channels and impoundments, and the area of a 2 meter buffer width of the perimeter for distributary channels and boat harbors (hectares).

File name ‘SkagitEstuaryPRA’/Estuary_HST (aka, prime rearing habitat) is a measure of the quantity of estuary habitat available to juvenile Chinook Salmon in the Skagit estuary by outmigration year. It is an index of habitat quantity because it selects only the area of habitat types used directly by rearing (as opposed to migrating) juvenile Chinook Salmon. The methods were used by Greene et al 2021. Because all the estuary restoration projects are detected by our estuary HST methods, the effect of restoration projects are integrated with pre-existing habitat for each year in the dataset. Noteworthy is the fact that pre-existing habitat has changed over the HST period in addition to the gains made through restoration. Specifically, over the HST period there are natural gains, natural losses, and a couple of instances of small magnitude human caused losses.

Possible hypotheses for estuary covariate (pairing habitat effect to life stage or life stage transition)

1. Estuary habitat conditions positively influence Estuary Abundance: this is the ‘within life stage’ response because increased habitat area alleviates density dependent processes in the currency of abundance of fish within the estuary. This would be the best hypothesis if most of the density dependent pressure is manifest in survival of fish with the estuary life stage (resulting a lower estuary abundance results, and possibly displacement of fish out of the estuary (density dependent migration response) which also results in a lower estuary abundance result. 
2. Estuary habitat conditions positively influence SAR: this is a ‘delayed life stage’ response because increased habitat area alleviates density dependent processes not in the currency of abundance or survival within the estuary but still have an impact of survival of cohorts later in the life cycle. This would be the best hypothesis if most of the density dependent pressure is manifest in improved growth or residence time in the estuary, which may not be detectable in the estuary abundance result but does translate to improved marine survival of cohorts after the estuary life stage. 


Landslide Covariate

File name ‘Skagit Basin Landslide volumes’ is a measure of the quantify (m^3) landslide sediment delivered to stream channels in the forested mountain subbasins of the Skagit River Basin (downstream of the dams) by outmigration year. 

The file has two options: not lagged and lagged. The lagged metric for landslide volume is the most appropriate metric to use because most of the landslides deliver sediment to stream channel well upstream of the anadromous reaches and it takes time for pulses of sediment to influence habitat areas used by salmon. It is difficult to generate a general rule the lag effect of landslides for our NTA model with the exception that the literature overwhelmingly suggests the lag is at multi-decade timescales. The lagged metric in the spreadsheet  (20 years, based on Benda and Dune 1997) shows the predicted response on salmon stream habitat conditions are somewhat reversed from a non-lagged result for the Chinook life stage data period (fig pasted below). To start with at least for running the NTA model, I suggest we use a simple lagged function like the 20 yr lag. I am in discussions with Gus and George Pess / Tim Beechie (both NOAA Watershed Program scientists) regarding a better way to portray the lag effect.

Regardless of how we end up lagging the landslide results, I’m not expecting a statistically detected Chinook Salmon life stage response outcome in the model because there are so many other issues involved with basin wide sediment dynamics influencing habitat conditions that fish respond to. For example, (1) landslide sediment is only part (albeit, an important part) of the overall sediment budget in the Skagit river basin, (2) the effects of landslide sediment would be most pronounced in the tributaries which is not where most of the Chinook habitat is located, (3) in addition to a lag effect, the magnitude of the effect also attenuates as the sediment moves downstream over time, and lastly (4) the impact may persist longer than a simple lag because even after a sediment wave passes there will be legacy effects of channel simplification, burial and transport of large wood, destabilized banks, etc.. 

All that said, it will be important to the discussion of the NTA analysis to illustrate some multi decadal scale lag effect in biotic response to a recover plan action that was completed (i.e., the Plan said treat forest roads for risks of sediment input to streams. Stakeholders did the work which resulting in less landslide sediment being produced).

Hypothesis for landslide covariate
1. Landslide volume negatively influences egg to fry survival. In our model this would be the life stage transition of escapement to freshwater outmigration abundance
2. Landslide volume negatively influences refuge rearing habitat and freshwater rearing habitat. In our model this hypothesis could be linked to the life stage of parr migrant abundance and/or the life stage transition of parr migrant productivity (i.e., parr migrants/escapement)

Freshwater habitat quality covariate

File name 'FW Rearing Area' contains a result which is an estimate of the quantity of freshwater rearing habitat available to juvenile Chinook Salmon in the Skagit River Basin by outmigration years 1992 through 2020. Each result is an ‘index’ of habitat quantity because it’s a combination of watershed habitat area by habitat type multiplied by a fish density for each habitat type, in this case for age 0+ Chinook Salmon. Skagit Chinook Salmon consist of an aggregate of six populations or stocks based on temporal and spatial separation in spawning, so the rearing ranges of progeny from these populations/stocks vary across the watershed (fig pasted below). Thus, FW Rearing Area Index results are provided for geographic areas coinciding with three Chinook population/stock aggregates that may explain patterns in the life stage specific data or assist in understanding the effect of restoration or natural habitat changes on a population/stock, a chief purpose of the Skagit Chinook IPM. The three geographic areas are the freshwater rearing areas for: 1) any population (All Pop Range), 2) any combination of mixed populations (Mixed Pop Range), and 3) only the dominant population which is the Upper Skagit Summer population (Dom Pop Range).

Methods: The FW Rearing Area Index result is the sum of watershed habitat area (hectares) by type multiplied by fish density for each habitat type (fish/ha). Habitat area data are from SRSC’s HST datasets for freshwater rearing areas (Hood et al 2019; Hinton et al 2018). Fish density results used to expand habitat areas to the currency of age 0+ Chinook Salmon freshwater rearing potential are from Bartz et al (2006) Table 4. SRSC’s freshwater rearing HST data are based on the large river floodplain polygons and include: (1) the area of all secondary channels within the floodplain polygons and (2) the edges of the large mainstem channels. Mainstem edge types (bar, natural and modified bank, and backwaters) are based on the types classified in Beechie et al (2005). Floodplain channel and backwater areas were calculated in ArcGIS as these features are polygons. Bank and bar features are arcs so only their length is calculated within ArcGIS. To estimate the area of bank and bar edges I multiplied their length by the average widths used in Beamer et al (2005) (Appendix C of the Skagit Chinook Plan, which were derived from Skagit mainstem field measurements reported in Hayman et al 1996).

Results: The effect of restoration projects are integrated with preexisting freshwater rearing habitat but essentially no freshwater restoration projects are detected by HST methods for the freshwater rearing habitat index. I don’t have the exact answer to this issue yet, but that’s the big picture of it – very little (or no) effect of restoration observed in HST data. In part, this is because not much restoration has occurred in this part of the watershed that would translate into detectable fish habitat change/gain. It also is likely true that our freshwater HST methods are too crude to detect the more subtle changes of freshwater restoration projects except for those that restore large areas of isolated/blocked off channel visible on aerial photos. Despite the lack of a restoration signal in the freshwater HST data, the HST results for freshwater rearing habitat show that floodplain channels are increased while backwaters decreased, and there are varying trends by mainstem edge habitat types. Mainstem bar edge areas increased while mainstem natural bank edge decreased. Mainstem modified bank edge area had a minor decrease in area over the HST period. The general reason for these changes appears to be through channel avulsion and migration processes where the mainstem channel avulses, or migrates, into an alternative alignment leaving its prior alignment as some form of floodplain channel, often replacing what was once a backwater with a connecting new floodplain channel. Additionally, the mainstem channel migration processes results in increased bar habitat formation at the expense of bank habitat as the migrating channel become more sinuous. The trends described above are shared for all three geographic results (fig pasted below) largely because the largest shifts in habitat occurred in the more unconfined floodplain reaches shared by multiple populations that included the dominant population too. 

To extrapolate the three HST observation years (1998, 2006, 2015) across the Chinook IPM years (1992-2020) I assumed the trends evident across the 18-year HST period were true and used linear regression equations to calculate Index values for all habitat types for each year, and summed the values into a single index value for each year. Based on investigation of reach level change in habitat type extent and type distribution, I believe accepting the trend assumption is reasonable, although I do not believe the trends are absolutely smooth linear functions because the mechanism of change is related to stream flow energy during freshets. Thus, while the overall trend across the 18-year HST period is likely true and can be hind- and forecast to the 29-year Chinook IPM years, there is likely variance in HST conditions within the overall trend not captured in my extrapolation method.

Extrapolation methods

Many PNW and Puget Sound salmonid researchers have linked habitat type metrics with observed or literature values of fish densities for the purpose of ‘scaling up’ site-based information to the watershed level (e.g., Reeves et al 1989; Beechie et al 1994; Beamer et al 2005 - appendix C of the Skagit Chinook Recovery Plan; Bartz et al 2006). These studies (or methods papers) were used to diagnose limiting factors within a watershed for purposes in planning/prioritizing salmon recovery actions across the watershed. I believe the same ‘scaling up” method is appropriate for pairing estimates of watershed habitat conditions to life stage specific fish population data, such as what we are doing with the NTA where we can convert site-based habitat area into a the currency of a habitat index value roughly equating to a life stage specific ‘potential capacity.’ Our approach is consistent with the ‘scaling up’ concepts used in the ‘intrinsic potential’ literature used for landscape analyses of salmonids (e.g., Burnett et al 2007 for Coho and steelhead; Busch et al 2011 for Chinook). Studies such as Greene and Beechie 2004; Scheuerell et al 2006; and Beechie et al 2021 are examples of integrating watershed level estimates of life stage specific fish potential capacity based on habitat type information with stock recruit functions. Beechie et al 2021 (found: https://repository.library.noaa.gov/view/noaa/29486 ) is NOAA Fisheries Science Center’s lasted version of ‘scaling up’. While the link to the NOAA report is for the Chehalis River Project (western Washington coastal river, not Puget Sound), this exact same method is being applied to the Skagit’s adjacent river to the south, the Stillaguamish. The NOAA methodology has become very sophisticated and Tim et al do a good job at documenting things but at the very root of it, Beechie et al (2021) is a more elaborate version (i.e., makes estimates for multiple species ; applies hypothesized mechanistic functions for how restoration actions change life stage capacity and survival) of the concepts developed by Reeves et al (1989).

Additionally, Beechie et al 2005 is provided as it is the refence for mainstem edge habitat type classification adopted by our HST methods. Hayman et al 1996 is the basis for mainstem edge habitat widths. 


